Why is not working so this session
is but OK, the recording is on now.
OK, so let's start up.
I usually start my lectures by this.
A colorful image of the stars
up from the universe. Uh,
this image was taken by the Hubble telescope.
If you want to need a read
more about this image,
you can go to the this link.
I put a video of that just to see.
What journey the Hubble telescope took
in order to take this colorful image
of their stars deep into the sky?
So this is the.
A video from the Earth POV view.
So you can see that.
The power of the Hubble telescope.
How it zooms inside.
But deep into this sky and take this.
A brilliant image.
So the reason I put this up video was that,
uh. We are going to do this same journey,
but instead of just deep into the
sky we are going to zoom inside
a computer system and see how our
programs in a language such as in C
programming language within Java is
executed in the underlying computer.
Another reason is that uh.
I want you to know in what part of the
computer science universe this core
correct course actually is located?
So we have to figure out where this
course or whatever we are going to do.
I mean, in this course happens
in the whole realm of the whole
discipline of computer science.
And the third main reason is this.
What is computer science or when the computer
science actually emerged as a science?
Uh, I'm going to tell you a very
brief history of computer science,
and then gradually mean we move
forward to the topics of discourse.
So basically, uh.
The first moment that the people could
look up into the sky and see the stars
they wanted to explore the universe and
see what are these objects in this times.
So they started to formulate
something called problems.
Among the very few problems were
how to measure the distance,
how to measure the height,
how to measure the length in order to take
a pass path from location A to location B.
And then they started to put more problems
and try to find solutions to those problems.
They figured out that there are a
lot of problems as you can see here.
Let me enable my pen. Oh.
Sorry.
I have to say there were a lot
of problems that seems odd.
There is no solution for that.
And it's very kind of weird for you.
But, uh later, you'll see that.
Most of the problems there is
no solution for those problems.
Also, among these problems there
were some problems that are there
is a solution for those problems.
But you can never ever reach the solution.
You can prove that there is a solution,
but in order to reach the solution,
you don't know how.
So the solution exists.
But reaching the solution.
Is not possible.
Among these problems that you can prove that
there is a solution various small part of it.
You can prove that there is a solution.
And also you can reach this solution.
So then you start building these
steps to reach this solution.
Very small portion of the
problems have this property.
And as a result,
you start writing or building these steps to
reach this solution that we call programs.
So again,
very small portion of the problems.
You can reach the solution to those problems.
And then we write programs to take
those steps to reach the solution.
As you know, most of the problems,
or actually we can say almost all
the problems has two main parts.
Algorithm,
which are the steps that we have
to actually take in order to reach
the solution and the data part,
which is basically how to represent the
input information and output solution.
For instance,
if you want to measure the distance
between the location X and the location,
why first of all you have
to represent X or a store.
The location of X and then install
the location of why and then you
apply the distance calculation.
For instance why minus X and
then the result should be stored
somewhere as a solution.
So again you have to store this
result as an output or data,
so any program to find a solution for
problem has two parts algorithm or
steps and data to represent the information.
He was long before the invention of the
computer systems that we could provide
solution to the problems by algorithm
and data among the very immediate.
Algorithms or programs to find
a solution was finding the Great
Common Divisor in primary school.
Actually, in high school,
I think you know how to find DHV two numbers,
which was proposed by Euclid in
300 years before the Christ.
Also, the approximation for the Pi number.
Basically, if you have a
circle of radius one. So high.
Arthur is the power of two.
If you have a area of 1,
so then you can have an approximate
approximation for Pi as one
divided by the radius is 1.
So then you can calculate what
is the exact approximation or
kind of number for the π number.
So which was proposed by Iraq with this
in 200 about 200 years before Christ?
Sorry I can't hear this.
And. Later, for instance,
for linear equations, for instance,
if you have two X + 5, is equal to zero.
You know how to go through some steps.
For instance,
you bring the five to the
other side of the equation,
and then X becomes equal to 5 / 2.
So these are the steps that you
have to take in order to find
the solution to this equation.
Also, for the quadratic equation,
you know how to solve the problem first
2X to the power of 2 plus. To ax minus.
For instance, one is equal to 0.
You know how to reach this solution.
Do you remember anyone can answer
what are these steps to find this
solution of a quadratic equation?
Anybody?
From the calculus. What was the formula?
We may have two solutions X1 or X2.
So you could say Lexi is if you take
this as the coefficient age is as the
coefficient P and this as the coefficient C.
Yes, correct Justin.
So we have minus b + -- sqrt B to the
power of two plus or sorry minus.
Four A C / 2 A and then if you end
up with two different solutions,
you have two solutions.
If you end up with one same
answer there just only one answer.
Anyways, I'm saying before the invention
of computer system we had programs.
We have algorithms,
we have data and then we have
solution for the problems.
Princess Alcaraz me was the one who
proposed this steps to find the solution
for equations and because of his name,
now we have the algorithm.
The world is bought from his name.
And basically this is a.
This is Euclid and these were the basic
machines that they were supposed to
take those steps to find a solution.
However, we know that taking these
steps to find the solution to
a problem are time-consuming or
we need to do a lot of effort.
So we decided to build machines
to do to take those steps for us,
or to do the task for us.
And again, this is not very new.
Basically, if you go to the Wikipedia.
History of computers.
You can figure out that there were.
Way before the modern era that
we have computer systems.
So among the very first few
I mean machines were.
I mean these primitive machines
that were designed to keep track
of the numbers of items,
and then we have our backers as a calculator.
One of the me,
I mean very primitive and first calculators.
And then hundred before Christ
we have this analog computers.
And gradually we move forward.
Up until the 1940s that we have the.
Systems that are very close to the
current or modern computer systems again.
We have way before the current country
system that we have machines to take
these steps to find a solution for us.
I mean running the programs for us.
And, uh, this is one is called Colossus,
which was used for deciphering the
German code during the World War Two.
I 1940s and you can see that the
these computer systems were huge and
they need some operators to operate
the programs inside these machines.
So. You see the computer science, uh,
was born because of solving the problems.
And then gradually we built
the machines to help us to take
these steps to find a solution.
And currently we have computer science
divided into three main spaces.
The first space is those courses or
topics that you are going to take
within your undergrad studies about
how to design the algorithm, how to
build these steps to reach the solution.
How to analyze an algorithm?
How much steps you need to
take to reach the solution.
What is the complexity?
Is it taking, for instance,
one day or I mean one year?
Is it a able?
Are you able to make it faster?
Is it able to use animal intelligence
or human intelligence to help
you find the solution faster?
So these are all different topics that
you're going to take in your undergrad
studies about how to reach the solution.
There are the second space or second
dimension of computer science,
which is basically about how
to represent data,
for instance,
how to represent that a memory out
represent data in file and make it permanent,
meaning that if there is no power is
still you keep track of your data.
The other is management system.
It's the name of one of your cores that
basically in this course you discuss
how to manipulate huge amount of data
and how to provide multiple access
by multiple users to the same data.
And for instance how to make
your data available on Internet
online or cloud services.
All these topics are in this second
dimensional Candace science.
And the 3rd dimension is
about building a machine.
How can we build a machine
that does the algorithm for us
and represent the data for us?
So there is a course computer architecture,
one or digital design and then
computer architecture two how to
build actual computer systems?
How to write programs in machine language
and then how to operate your program?
For instance the algorithm and
data on a machine.
So now my question finally is this.
Where you should put this
system programming course.
This course, uh, in these three categories,
either in the first step algorithm part,
second step data part,
or the third step machine part.
So I'm going to put it on.
I mean kind of pole.
So let me.
Yeah, I put this URL in the chat box,
so if you go to the this
website or kind of this link.
Uh, let me know when all of
you have access to this link
and then we can start a poll.
I mean, finding what is the
answer to this question?
So you can start answering this question so.
Where do you put system programming course?
Data. It's a course about how to deal
to represent the data in memory or
in file or in databases algorithm.
It's a course about designing steps to
reach this solution of the problems machine.
It's a course about how to deal with with
machines in order to run our program,
none of them or mixture of them.
In the bottom side you can see the.
You are not able to see the correct answer,
but you can see the distribution of answers.
We have 82. Upvote and we have
114 student in the class, so I'm
waiting for the other student vote.
Guys wake up.
So let's see the answer.
So the correct answer is machine A.
Actually we have very few students.
16% of these students had the correct answer.
Uh, most of this didn't put the
mixture of data, algorithm and machine.
So it's kind of.
I mean they you you may think
that this course is about.
I mean all these three dimensions,
but actually this course to launch
the third category, the machine.
So we are not going to design algorithm
to find a solution to a problem.
We are not going to discuss how to
represent data in, I mean efficient way.
Basically we are going to discuss
how a machine runs our program.
Although helping this now, I mean,
knowing this knowledge helps us
to write a better algorithm or
write a better data representation.
But it still discourse belongs
to the machine category.
Any question?
No question, by the way, it's not good
that you don't have any question. So.
I either I'm going,
I'm explaining everything clearly,
which is not the case I think.
Or you don't pay attention to the class,
so please ask questions as much as possible.
So anyways, this course belongs to the
third category and basically as I said
in the machine related course courses,
and in particular in this part
of the machine related courses.
As you can see operating system.
Going to discuss how an operating system, uh?
Fetch is our program.
So basically we give our algorithm
and our data to an operating
system and the operating system
brings it inside the machine to
run or execute our instruction.
So Mason says that it's still not convinced,
uh, gradually, you'll see why we could
discuss in the third, uh category.
But as I said, uh, this course is helping
you to know how an operating system
runs your program inside the machine.
So this is basically in this dimension.
Because we need the steps which is
algorithm to program the machine.
Uh, The thing is you
already write your program,
so you already know what are the steps
to take the to find the solution.
The only thing is that how you
give your program to a machine
to take these steps for you so.
You're right, it's still.
We have to write some other programs,
but these programs are programs are
not about finding the solution.
These programs are a bad
running your programs.
So basically we write programs for programs.
Uh, Victor says,
are we dealing with Unix specifically?
Yes, the operating system
that we are going to discuss,
I'm going to explain little next is
called Unix and I'll tell you why.
And why not assembly systems?
There is another course, rohai, uh,
I'm going to talk about this a little bit,
but there's another specific
course called assembly language.
In that course,
you deal with how to write
programs in assembly languages.
So this is not discussed,
but again in the same category.
And they, Sam says, sounds good.
OK, so let's continue.
So I'm going to.
Tell you a very short story about the
design of the computers or machines,
so hopefully it's not the
I mean bedtime story.
I hope you enjoy this story.
Uh, it was, uh, this guy fund Newman.
Who was a polymath?
Basically he was an expert in
mathematics in computer science
and electrical engineer and
also he was a physicist.
So he exactly know how to put all
these parts together to build a
machine that runs the program.
Uh, for for the computer scientist,
so he knows how to put the electrical
current to simulate the binary system
binary from mathematics or logic.
Two and falls in order to take these steps
and run our programs in computer science.
The architecture that he
proposed was based on this idea.
Very simple structure.
He said that we need a memory
units to store the information.
What type of information?
Any program has data,
port and algorithm part as we
set to find a solution to very
small portion of the problems.
Both.
Of these are part of a program
should reside on the memory.
And then for instance,
the data port for the input information
are also the final solution.
Also,
those steps that we have to take and
now we want to give to a machine
to take so we call it instruction
or simply your code or I mean,
C code or Java code or whatever code
that you write because it instructions
and then the instruction step by step.
Is taken from the memory 2 processor.
Which is a unit to execute
the instruction through a
communication channel called bus.
So the first instruction.
By bus is fetched to processor,
the processor executes the instruction
and return the result to the memory.
And then next one.
Execution returned a result
and then the 3rd one and etc.
So you see this computer design has only
2 main part in memory and processor,
which we usually called CPU
central processing unit and the
communication channel is called bus.
Fun human architecture has three
main properties. First, both data
and instruction should be in memory.
So you shouldn't put the instruction
directly to the processor.
It should go first to the memory. Secondly,
any part of the memory is addressable,
meaning that if this is the memory.
You can find any location of
the memory by its address.
For instance, the address usually
in the hexa numbering system,
for instance zero, FF0.
This is the address each one is
represented by four binary numbers.
F is 1111.
This F is 1111 and this is 0000,
so this is the binary sequence
of the address.
So if you bring it to the decimal system,
what would be the number?
Basically you have to multiply each
number to the power of 2/2 to the
power of 02 to the power of 1 and
this 1/2 to the power of two and
this 1/2 to the power of three.
This one goes to 2 to the power of four
and etc, and then you some altogether
and it becomes a decimal number,
and that's the address of this location.
So any location in the memory can be
addressed by a number binary number,
we can compute it as converted
to decimal number.
And the third property is that.
The instruction are going to be
executed sequentially one by one.
So if you have, for instance,
10 lines of instructions,
defund Neumann architecture is designed
in a way that it starts from the first
instruction and in a sequential way.
It's a 15X instruction,
next instruction, etc.
So in another word,
the fundamental architecture doesn't support.
Parallel instruction and execution
of the instructions.
So it doesn't support multiple processors.
For instance, right now you can buy a
computer system with multiple cores.
The fundamental architecture
doesn't support this way of
execution for the instructions.
Through this course and basically
in most of the undergrad courses,
we assume that we are dealing with
a fun moment based architecture,
so the assumption is that your
computer is not a parallel.
I mean it doesn't have multiple
CPU or processors.
And you can add peripheral devices
to your computer for instance,
hard disk drives USB or SSD or solid
state drives to permanent your data.
Or you can add input or output
devices such as keyboard.
Keyboard or mouse is.
Or even this digital pen
that I'm going I'm using.
These are called peripheral devices and
the computer becomes computer system.
Most of the case they considered a
permanent storage as I also sometimes
you can see you can hear that
department stores are also IO because.
You can input.
You can ask for information
from the hard disk drive.
Also you can use the hardest
stuff as an output.
You can store the information
as an output device.
So in most of the operating system,
these two different types of devices
are one type of device is called
eye or input input output devices.
And this is the mother manufacturer
manufactured a device of
the fundament architecture.
This is called main board.
Most of you may know that or motherboard
if you go to the market and buy a computer.
This is called main board.
This part is the power part.
You attach a power plug to the main board.
To have electrical power.
These parts are the memory modules,
you attach your memory modules here.
Then you buy a CPU from some
companies such As for instance, Intel.
Or AMD.
Or other,
for instance from Mac Apple Company,
you can buy a CPU and attach it to this part.
These are the IO devices you
attach your IO devices here,
for instance, these are the serial
ATA port for the hard disk drive.
These are the USB ports.
These are for keyboard and mouse.
These are the ext cords
for video cards and etc.
So it seems we have some questions.
At some point, the Unix family diverted
from fund Newman 000. Thank you.
Michelle The thing is Unix is not a hardware.
Unix is an operating system,
will see later what is unique.
So fun Luminarc isn't designed for hardware,
not for any operating system etc.
So you'll see what is Unix, what is up?
I mean hardware and it's so.
Basically there is no relation.
I mean you cannot make a relationship
between Unix and fundamental architecture.
Uh, I'm not sure. I mean,
you can see whether this I just picked
this neighbor from Google this image, but.
There is some, uh?
I'm not sure from what
company this motherboard is.
So sorry about that, it's on.
Ethan uh what ones are the bus.
Oh a good question.
So what is the bus?
So there are.
This is about electrical engineer,
so you have to ask the electoral engineers.
These mainboards if this is the main board.
They have some,
uh, I mean.
Had to call it, I mean some depth.
Basically, this is not just one layer,
these are multiple layers of circuits.
Inns inside and inside DDS layers.
You have some wirings,
some digital wires.
These digital wires are called plus.
There is a specific channel between memory
and CPU which we call it data boss.
Dallas is designed to transfer the data.
We have another bus called address pause,
so another you can call it a road or another
Ave to transfer the address by address.
Price processor selects one location
of the memory and what the data
bus we transfer the actual data.
There are other passes with the
ioso bosses for the IO devices.
But these buses are inside the main
board with digital wires. You need.
You know about this more in computer
architecture one and two, those courses.
So in this course our focus is about
processor because processor is the
unit that executes the programs or
the instruction of the programs.
So. In main important thing
about the processors are this.
You are not able to ask processors
to execute whatever you want.
Processors are limited to some set
of instructions called instruction.
Set. Or IS.
Some of them are able to do only addition.
They are not able to do other calculations.
Some of them are able to do addition
subtraction, but there is no way to
do division by those processors.
So this is the limit of the
processors and made by the companies.
There are two types of processors,
RISC and CISC.
RISC base are called R stands for reduced.
I means instruction sets.
As means said, and.
C means either CPU or computer.
So basically,
reduced instruction set computers
are those processors that have
very small number of instructions.
But if you want to execute
those instructions,
there are highly optimized.
You can run those instruction very fast,
for instance, they only they are only
able to do into their calculation,
but they do it very fast.
Contrary to the risk type of processor,
we have Cisco.
Type of processors.
These processors have huge amounts
of instructions.
You can do whatever almost whatever you want,
but they are not highly optimized.
Let me give you an example.
For instance, if you go to the
laundry room of your building,
you see a laundry machine.
And you see a digital unit on
top of the laundry machine that
basically keep track of the time.
This is the processor I mean inside
this digital unit we have a processor,
but this processor is very limited.
It is just trying to keep track
of time so it doesn't need to do.
For instance is square root or
for instance a number to the power
of another number.
It just need a subtraction or addition.
So you go to the market and buy a
risk type of processor for laundry machine.
However, if you are going to write programs,
very different programs or any
type of programs,
you go to the market and buy
a sister processor,
because you don't expect what are the
instructions you may do integer calculation.
You may do floating point
calculation and whatever you need,
so you have to buy a SSD type of processor.
But what is the price?
The price is that the
instruction are not optimized,
they are not able to be run very fast.
For instance,
if you go to the market
and buy a computer system,
most of the current computers are
based on these two architectures
are not going to explain what
are these numbers again in the
computer architecture one and two,
you learn about these numbers,
but these are the processors of type Cisco.
And if you go to this link later,
uh,
you can see exactly what are those
instructions about 1000 instructions
you can perform on these processors,
either by Intel or AMD. These
companies that made the processors.
OK, if you have some questions,
a success risk is greater than six are
in terms of the number of instructions.
Risks are a lower number of
instructions, but it faster.
Uhm?
Yes, system is complex instruction
set computer thank you cap.
Yes, this means this is called
complex. Instruction sets.
Computer. Entire, I mean income in comparison
with the risk type of the computers.
Oh, a good example rohai put.
So for instance we had for the gaming
we needed a specific type of processor
that does the graphic type of task.
Very optimized or very fast so we can
buy a GPU graphic processing unit
that are specifically designed for
doing the instruction about graphics.
So you see processors or might be very
I mean application based processor.
For general purpose is to our processors.
Anyways, now I'm going to.
Give you a second chapter of our story,
which is basically how a program is
fetched by the processor to be executed.
By I mean sweet bus so.
The main thing about the machine is
that machines are working with the
binary numbering system zero and one.
Or also we can say plus five
voltage represent. Number one.
And zero voltage basically represents zero,
so any computer system or any
digital unit works with electrical
power and represent by zero,
one by the plus five and zero voltages.
So the only language that the machine
understand is a stream of zeros and ones.
So it doesn't understand for instance,
integer a is equal to zero.
It doesn't understand this language,
it only understands the wrong ones.
So how a processor is able to
execute a command in an instruction.
You should convert your program
in a stream of binary numbers.
Which we call it opcode or operation code.
For instance, here I put an example.
This is an example for adding two numbers.
The processor sees this.
Instruction.
From memory,
so basically it fetched this instruction
from memory to it to itself and
then based on these binary numbers,
it decides to take some steps.
The first is what is this binary number
it trans lated this binary number two,
for instance addition.
And then basically it says that
I'm going to do an addition.
So what are the operands?
By looking at this binary number,
for instance 0110.
This is an address of the first operand.
It fetches the value at this
location of the memory.
So imagine we have this memory.
And this is the location
of the first operand.
So basically if you convert it to
the decimal number, it becomes A6.
So it looks up at the six
location of the memory.
Assuming we have the number 10 here.
Or 20. So this is the address 110.
It fetches these numbers, so this becomes 20.
And then it looks up the second operand.
So what is the address
for the second operand?
For instance, we have 0111.
So basically it looks to this location 0111,
which is the seven location of the memory.
Assuming we have 30 here,
it fetches this value to the CPU.
And then it does the addition so it adds
2 + 30 is becomes 50 for instance and
bring out the result back to the memory.
In what location of the memory?
At this location, imagine we have 0011,
so it pushed the result to the third
location of the memory. For instance,
this is the third location 0011.
This is the location for here.
It puts 50 here. So you see.
Whatever you ask the processor to
execute for, you should be in a
binary sequence of numbers or opcode.
And the way it translate this opcode
to the different steps of execution is
called instruction decoding or decoder.
It's very simplified version,
but almost all the processor
does the same very similar way.
So now let's see if I want to
ask a processor to print out
Hello World, what happens?
This is the program that I have
to write in a computer system to
just simply print out Hello World.
How many number of line I have to
put on how many binary sequence I
have to put on top of each other in
order to print out the hello world,
let's see what are the number of lines?
If you zoom inside the last line
of the program.
So we have this.
This is the line number and these are
the binary sequence of the opcodes.
So let's do more. So again,
this is the last line.
This is the number of the lines in total,
and this is the last opcode
or the last instruction.
One thing happens here is
that I told you that these are
these are in binary numbers 01.
Why we see? The number 3.
Why we see the number 8?
I told you that these should
be in the binary numbers.
For instance,
here we have a part of the opcode,
which is free.
But it should be in a binary number.
What's the problem with this?
Or we have a lot of questions here.
So anybody has the idea why when I
look at the OP code of my program
to print out Hello War instead
of seeing it binary numbers,
I can see some non binary numbers
such as three, three or nine or here.
Asha Gill says, ah, it is short and
for us it is converted to decimal.
Cap says. So you are exactly
where Sam is right, hexadecimal.
Basically, if I were to print
the opcode in binary sequence,
it becomes a huge sequence of numbers.
In order to make it a little bit short.
But for the sake of presentation,
not for the actual code in the
memory or in the processor,
just for the sake of presentation.
Usually instead of just
representing the opcode.
Or the line numbers in a binary usually
they show it in hexa numbering system.
So basically,
each number of hexar represents.
If you have a digit in hexa and if you
want to convert it to the binary number,
each digit of the hexa is
representing four binary numbers.
For instance, this number
3309 is actually this binary sequence.
And nine is 01001, so this becomes
the binary sequence for this part.
For the other part, again,
these are each digit of the
hexa is 4 digital binary,
so it becomes 0000 and etc.
And what is but my main question is that
how many lines of opcode we have to write?
To just print Hello world.
So we have to convert this number
3850000 in the hex R2.
Binary or Dan to decimal?
What's the number in decimal?
Anybody has the idea?
You already know the algorithm or you
already know how to take some steps
to reach the decimal number or decimal
value for any hexadecimal numbers.
So basically you have to multiply
each digit to the power of 16.
One and then multiply by 16 to the
power of 216 to the power of three,
and these are just zero and then
sum them together. If you do this.
So let's do this together.
So. It was 385, so it becomes a free
multiply by 16 to the power of three plus.
Eat a multiplied by 16 to the power
of 2, plus was the last number.
5.
So 5 * 16 to the power of 1.
The other digits are 00 multiplied by,
anything becomes zero,
so I shouldn't add them,
so the final result is, oh sorry,
I couldn't correct number here.
14,416 so basically I have to write.
14,000. Lines of opcodes just to
simply print out hello world.
And. So it's very time consuming.
Also, if there is a bug in this program,
how can I know where is the bot?
For instance, what happens if I
put something wrong in this opcode?
For instance, instead of putting 001,
I had to put for instance 0101.
So you see how difficult it is
to debug or find a problem with
these huge amount of opcodes.
So their readability or legibility
legibility of the code is basically none.
That was the birth of
another language assembly.
Basically they say that instead of
writing your program in opcode and give
it to a processor to execute for you.
It's better to write your
program in a better language,
close to human or natural language,
and then you use another translator
to convert it to the opcode.
So here is the birth of a assembly
language in assembly language instruction,
are more close to the natural
language for instance, you right at.
And then this location with this location,
comma and then the result
goes to this location.
So these brackets shows a location in memory.
So you see,
compared to the opcode is much more readable,
and even a person who is not in computer
science can understand this instruction.
And you write your code in assembly
language and then you give it to
a translator called assembler and
the assembler translated to opcode.
But again it's still processor
only understand opcode.
If you give the assembly instruction
into the memory and then ask
the processor to run to run
your Assembly assembly lines.
It's not able to do that.
The processor doesn't understand
assembling it only understands opcodes.
And now. You are able to write a program
that does hello word in assembly
and this is the assembly language.
So if you look at this assembly language.
Anybody can understand these lines
try to read this piece of code
and let me know which part of the
code does the actual printing?
So guys Kathy, this program,
this assembly program and let
me know which part of the
program does the actual printed.
So Joshua says called Q this part.
Uh, we have a candy, yes, so you see.
Even if you are not understanding,
or if you are not familiar
with the assembly language by
looking at the assembly language,
you can easily figure out what's
the instruction and what the
instructions are supposed to do.
So correctly because this call queue goes
to this label and the actual printing
happens at this part of the code.
Also, other uh instructions,
for instance move basically means
that put a number from this
location to this location or from
this location to this location.
No OP means no operation,
meaning that just nothing to do top
return you see these are at least very
close to the human natural language.
And also.
The benefit is this 14,000 lines of opcode,
because only.
14 to 17 lines of code is much more
smaller and much more readable.
So that was the language that most
of the computer scientists from the
beginning tried to write programs.
So among the very few first computer
scientists who start programming
in computers,
was this guy one of the most
famous guy in computer science?
Dennis Ritchie.
And also Kenneth Tom found this guy.
Can a staff and they will start programming
assembly language in the Bell labs?
Later it became.
AT&T Lab and the time was
1972 again in 1940 or in 1950.
There were no programming languages,
they were opcodes.
They put the binary sequence
of opcodes and give it to the
machine to execute for them.
Later, as you can see,
after 10 or I mean 15 years,
they invented assembly language to
write programs and they are right
now working writing programs in
assembly language for dismay friend,
this is if you search about this.
This huge machine is. Call GE 645.
It's a mainframe at those time.
So. They start everybody.
All the programmers are started to
write programs in assembly language.
For instance, they have a
problem they wanted to write a
program for solve the problem.
They start writing the assembly
language for the data part for
this step or algorithm part,
and then they put these assemblies.
Today and assembler.
And then the assembly makes it opcode.
And then the opcodes, which are
the sequence of zero and once.
They put to the memory.
Gradually they figured
out that some programs,
because of huge amount of lines of
opcodes they don't fit into the memory.
Either they had to buy more memory
or they have to come up with a
solution to run a large programs of
opcodes in a small amount of memory.
Do you have any idea how to run a large
program without buying more memory?
Anybody of you?
Any idea about how to run a large
program in a small amount of memory?
Charger says do it in pieces.
Justin says a compressed again processor
doesn't understand what is compressed.
It just understand the binary.
Uh, I mean opcodes.
So when you do compress,
you have to do decompress so.
Lucas says that permanent storage again,
the only accessibility for
the processor is memory.
Even if you put your program in his storage,
such as hard disk drive or
USB again for execution,
this is a very important issue.
Any instruction should go to
memory because processor only.
Have the access to the memory processor
cannot access the storage directly.
It should access the storage by the memory.
Any idea?
So let me give you very simple all
these solution to confess are actually
borrowed from the society or real world.
Imagine we have 200 students. And we want.
But our classes have the capacity 30.
How can I teach three 200 students in
the class with 30 student capacity?
An easy way is this. You ask fairly.
Students come to the class you teach them.
And then you ask them to leave the class,
and then the second group of 30
students you teach them, and then you
ask them to leave the class and etc.
So basically you can run a
large program part by part.
Whatever part is needed to execute it.
You bring that part to the memory,
execute that part and then remove
that off from memory and make a space
for the new group of instruction.
So this is called paging.
Basically,
you run a large program by page by page.
You extract one page of your program,
put it in the memory and run it,
and then next page,
and then next page.
That was one problem that happened for
the large programs and the solution
for that was proposed as a paging.
Another problem was this. What if we
have only one computer at that time?
The computers were very expensive and they
were just one or two in the whole university,
so we have one computer and but there
are a lot of computer scientists.
For instance, Alex had a program to
run also Hussein as a program to run,
and other students have a program to run.
So who's turn it is to run the program.
Should I work based on the first in first?
Server first output.
Should I give priority to Alex?
Because Alex is a manager?
Or give less priority to us,
and because we're sending the student.
Or can I share the processor in this way?
One instruction for this program?
And then the second one instruction
from this one fund is one from this.
It's kind of interleaving the execution.
We call it sharing the processor
between different programs.
This is called the scheduling.
So they provide some mechanism.
In order to make it able for multiple
programs to run on a simple computer.
But The thing is, who does that for me?
Good plastic agent.
Who does the scheduling?
The computer system is able
to run any opcode, but.
What program does this scheduling for
other programs or what programs does
the paging for the large program?
You see, you have to write another program.
For the benefit of other programs,
so you have to write a program
for other programs.
This program, for instance, does the paging.
This program does the scheduling.
This program does other tasks for
the benefit of other programs.
This program is called operating system.
So basically after writing system
is a program.
Which that main task of the operating
system is not just to find a
solution to a real world problem.
The main task of the operating system
is to help other programs to be able to
be executed in a system in a computer.
Again, what what is the programming
languages like other programs?
This is a program,
so the programming languages assembly.
So operating system is written
in assembly is given to the
assembler and becomes opcode.
So operating system very similar
to other programs become up code
in order to be executed in a CPU
and does the paging and does the
scheduling for other programs.
These type of programs that is the
main goal is to help other programs.
It's called system level programming.
Operating system is a system level program.
Other programs is called application
level program and this is the.
A kind of theme or schema for
these different types of programs,
so we have machine.
You have a program in assembly language.
Cold operating system.
But the main purpose is not to
find a solution to a problem.
The purpose is to help other programs.
The other program is still
written in assembly language.
But their main task is to
find a solution to a.
Problem.
If you are writing assembly programs
as a part of operating system,
you are told that you are doing system.
Level programming.
However, if you write assembly languages.
As an algorithm and data to
solve a real world problem,
you are doing application.
Level. Programming.
It's still both of these programs are
written in assembly language given
to assembler and becomes opcode.
So both are opcode.
The task or the duties are different.
And that was the idea of Dennis Ritchie,
and also Kenneth Thompson.
They proposed to design an operating
system to help other programs
written in assembly languages,
and the first operating system
will called Unix written in
assembly in 1979 or 1970.
69 or 19 seven.
So now you see the difference
between an operating system
and a fun human architecture.
Operating system is the program.
Written in assembly given to
assembler becomes OP code and
it is runnable on processor.
But the task is not to find a solution.
It is to help other programs also.
Other programs is called application level.
Programs written in assembly because opcode
ready to be executed in the processor.
Old system programs,
system level programs and application
level programs are in assembly.
Language is bekum opcode.
Because the processor only
understand OP code or binary numbers.
After assembly language.
They propose in new language, why?
So when they started designing the Unix
as an operating system in assembly,
at first this operating was
operating system was very small,
very small program.
First, as the main task was just
doing the paging for large programs.
Later they figured out that they have to
run multiple programs so they add more
lines of assembly code and make it up code.
For instance to do scheduling.
Later they figure out that they
have to help the programs much more,
so they add more and more.
Libraries are more and more helpful a code
for to help other programs and gradually.
This small Unix becomes a very large Unix.
For instance, found 100 lines of code.
Assembly code,
it becomes 1,000,000 lines of code.
So you see, the Unix operating
system becomes very big and
the manage or debugging this
operating system becomes very hard.
It still dissembling language is
much more smaller than the popcorn,
but again, it becomes large gradually.
And because of that,
they said that let's design a new
language that reduced the number of
noise and becomes more readable.
And then they design a program
called P and after that they
designed the program called C.
The programming language C that you
right now use for your programs.
Actually was born at this moment.
Four just writing a better
Unix operating system.
So at first they designed this new
language for system level programming.
All the application level programming
where is still in assembly.
So all the other programs to solve their
real world problems but in assembly.
But for the operating system Unix,
they designed the new language C.
To enhance the Unix operating system.
So as a result, they start to rewrite.
The whole unit since it.
The new project does so basically they
are given the Unix in assembly language.
They rewrite their Unix in assembly
language to C language and then
they give it to the compiler of DC.
To make it again, assembly language and then
give it to assemble to make it awkward.
So here is the workflow. So you see this.
See lines of code are much more easier.
For instance, to do the addition you do
a normal addition A plus P becomes C.
You give it to the
compiler of the C language.
It translated to the assembly lines
and then you give these assembly lines
to December and it brings it to occur.
And at first it was just for Unix.
Other programmers should
do in assembly language.
And if you are going to write our
Hello world program in a setting
in C language instructors 14 lines,
it becomes simply just these four lines.
You call this library to do is standard
input output and then you print it.
Even if you give this piece of
code to a kid, for instance,
in a first or second year of school,
that kid could understand what's
the purpose of this program.
And that's the main idea behind
the C programming language.
Much more readable and much close to the
natural language and less number of lines.
So you're right.
Unix operating system.
In C language you give it to a compiler.
It makes it an assembly.
Instruction you give it to assembler.
It brings you opcodes.
It would be another new language.
For instance Java language or Python
language or whatever programming
language you write your program
in those languages you give to
the compiler of those languages
it brings it to the assembly lines
you give to the same assembler,
and it brings it to outcome. Again,
why because processor only does opcode?
Processor doesn't understand Python Java.
It doesn't understand assembly.
It only understands a cut.
So. We don't have enough time,
so I'm just going to escape I
I'm going to cover this later.
Uh, maybe now we can. Do that.
Oh, OK, what if I change the machine,
for instance?
So far we write programs to be executed
in a machine in a processor made by Intel.
Now I want to do the programming
in a new machine, for instance
in an apple or in a Mac laptop,
what happens?
Should I change my program and re
write my program in the new system or
it's enough to do the programming the
same language C the same program but?
Use the same assembler to create
a up code for this new machine.
Does it work or should I do something else?
So Mason says that there is no
need for any change because.
The same assembler can translate the the.
Assembly lines out of the
compiler to do the opcode.
The answer is. Because.
Any processor as I said,
have different instruction sets,
for instance Intel.
Has the instructions 011014 edition.
A processor by Apple Company,
for instance, for the Mac computer,
may have 00114 edition.
So the opcodes of different
processors are different. As a result.
The same program in C language
doesn't need to be changed.
However, the assembly language
should be changed at the assembler.
So because the assembler should know
what is the opcode of the new machine.
So you don't have to change your program,
but you do have to change the
assembler because the opcode
of the processor is different.
So for a new machine you need a
new assembler in order to create a
new opcode for that new processor.
So then. They said that.
Why is C language used only
for Unix and other programmers
programmers does in assembly?
Why not use this C for
other programs as well?
So then they decided C
for all type of programs.
Whether it's a system level,
programs as an operating system
or an application level programs.
So they start releasing the program
C for other computer scientists
and ask them to write their
program and slept Justin Assembly.
Write it in C.
So again,
at first she was only designed
for Unix as an operating system
to help the operating system.
However,
later they said that let's
do other programs in C,
So they release it DC and the compiler
for C and help other computer
scientists to write programs in C.
So then this becomes the nowadays
architecture you write your program
as an application level program
to find solution for real world
problem by C programming language.
You give it to the compiler of the C
and make it assembly and then you give
it to the assembler of your machine.
It makes it up code for that machine.
Also, an operating system such
as Unix is written in C,
and then it's given to the
Assembly of the compiler of C,
and it comes assembly and it's given to the.
Assembler of a machine and becomes opcode.
So you see that Unix can be run on
a Mac if you give the assembly of
the unit to assemble of the Mac.
You can run Unix on Intel processor.
In case for that you have to give the
assembly lines of Unix to the assembler
of the Intel processor and make it awkward.
So regardless of your machine,
everything depends on the
assembler of that machine.
You write your application level and
system level programs on C language.
You change your assembler to make
it runnable for different machines.
And now the last part of today's lecture.
Is this? The name of this course is called.
System programming,
so it's not system level programming.
So we don't have this part.
What does the title of discourse mean?
It's not application level programming,
it's not system level programming,
it is system programming.
It is something between these two.
So the purpose of this course within the
whole next lectures are not teaching you how
to write system level programming by Etsy,
so you are not going to
write a new operating system.
You're not going to add any.
Additional feature to Unix or
any other operating system.
This is the task of other courses.
But what do you do in this course?
Is it still you are writing C
programs at the application level?
So you already know how to do this,
but what's the benefit of this course?
The benefit of this course is this.
You are.
Trying to study the topics
between these two levels.
You are trying to know
how an operating system.
As a system level program runs
an application level program.
So you are going to see the connection
between application level programs
and the system level programs.
Is specifically.
As your friend says,
in this course we focus on just
Unix as an operating system and
we are going to learn how Unix
is helping our C programs to be
executed by the computer system.
And why we should know how to Unix?
Is executing our C programs
anybody have any idea?
Why we should know? Uh, how Unix is
executing or helping our program?
We can simply run our application
level program on C language and then
let it run on any operating system.
Why we should know.
Details of the operating system.
Any idea?
So Justin says that to understand
how computer code works.
So if you understand that,
what's the benefit?
Victor says a good answer
optimized the execution.
But the execution is
done by the processor.
But we write programs in C.
Exactly CAP says the correct answer.
Basically, if we know how the
operating system is helping our
program to be run on the processor,
we can ask you for a specific type of helps.
We can sometimes.
Bypass the operating system.
We can sometimes know.
I mean, kind of.
Uh, ask some specific type of help
that other programmers do not know
because they don't know how operating
system is working or helping.
So I put this slide.
If you see the movie.
Matrix.
In the in that movie there very strong
boy which basically tries to convince a.
Neil, that if you try to
understand how the world works
then you can manipulate the world.
So basically that's the main
idea of this course.
If you know how operating system is
helping other programs to be run on
the processor and then you are able
to manipulate the operating system.
You are trying to,
for instance use some specific
feature of the Unix operating system.
So that you can write an efficient program.
So that was the story of today's lecture.
So if you are sleeping, please wake up.
And these are just few last slides.
So I I use this up.
The slide from the matrix.
So all these students wake up,
I'm going to finish my lecture
today and continue on Wednesday.
But up until next Wednesday we
have very few slides that I'm
going to explain about the course
structure and etc next Wednesday.
But, uh, we don't have enough time for that,
but at least you have to know
my name and my contact point.
Uh, my name is Hussein. So.
And, uh, my office.
Right now I'm in my office or Lantern tower.
This is my room number.
Uh, an amazing thing is that my
extension is also 2999, so I'm kind of.
Ah. Uh, attached to these triples
numbers and then this is my email.
And next Wednesday I'm going to
explain what is the course structure,
what are the assignments?
What are the evaluations and attach are?
If you are still interested in continuing
this course with me otherwise?
Uh, there's no need for you to
attend the next lecture to know
what is the evaluation and etc.
And I hope this is the poster for our course,
so I hope you continue this journey with me.
Also, you dare actually dare to
continue this journey with me and, uh.
Yeah, that's it. Now I'm going to.
Finish the lecture?
Uh, I'm going to be available on the office.
I mean,
in an online office in the blackboard,
if you go to.
A deal at the office in the blackboard.
Uh, you can see there is an office hour.
I'm going to be there up until the next hour.
If any question you have in mind,
I'm ready to answer those questions.
And yeah, that's pretty much it,
so let me see. You're done, let me see.
What are the other questions in the chat?
You're welcome and have a great day.
So let's see what are the questions.
Thank you Matthew. Thank you,
Justin. Take care of you too.
It's all those that put the
question in the chat box.
Uh, wait in the class and then
I can answer your question.
Ah, there is no lab for the first week,
so the labs started next week so
there is no lab for this week.
Thank you Robert. You too. Thank you Baba.
Thank you y'all. You too thank you Shannon.
Nice picture tenant.
Uh, thank you Monica.
You too have a good day.
Thank you. Yeah, yeah.
Thank you mija. You too have a good day.
Oh, that's a good question.
So this is a. Uh, let me go to
this slide if you go to this link,
you have to search.
If you go to this link.
Uh, you can see, uh,
this is Tasha designed by this
artist Nicholas Love Arena and it's
called grand Defining that grant challenge.
So you can read more about
the location and the size
of this statue at this link.
Uh, thank you Hallie. Thank you Xena.
You too have a good day. Thank you, Ahmed.
Oh, this one.
You mean this is the start up.
San Francisco I was in a conference.
Uh, and this is the, uh.
A beach next to the gold, uh,
the Golden Gate Bridge. Yeah.
So three exactly tell you where is the beach.
Uh, it is here.
It's a Baker beach in San Francisco.
Yeah, I was in the second year
of my PhD in this conference,
so I took this picture.
Actually, no.
Another friend of mine actually
helped me to this week.
That's me, yeah.
Thank you.
So Victor, are we going to use a VM
with Unix installed for this course
or create a partition running on it?
Oh, I'm going to explain this
in the next Wednesday, but.
It's up to you if you want to
have a Unix on your system.
Unix based systems such as Linux or
other other distribution of Unix you
are able to install it on your own
computer as a separate partition.
However the Computer Science School
provides a unique space systems to
there or Linux you are able to connect
to those systems in the school,
so you don't need to install that,
so there are.
There are Linux based system in this.
So.
Uh, I'm going to explain how to
connect these machines next Wednesday.
I mean, they're coming next Wednesday,
so you just use your own machine to
connect the Unix based system in this
school and then do all the assignment.
Or all these submission, etc.
This is up to you.
You can install your own version of
the Unix or you connect to the system
in this school and use this system,
yeah?
But I'm going to explain how to do that,
yeah?
Honestly, it depends.
Uh, my experience shows that it's better
to connect to this system in the school.
Because if you install a another
operating system in your system,
not only you have to waste,
I mean a great deal of your
storage for that operating system.
Usually there is an incompatibility
between the Unix based system
and other operating system.
For instance,
if you have Windows and your system,
you'll have to be careful when
you install a Linux based system,
so the order matters and there
are some issues and etc.
So sometimes it ruins your windows
and you lose all your information.
You have to be careful about
installing a new operating system
on a current operating system,
so because of these problems I would
suggest you to use the systems available
in the computer science department.
Otherwise.
Uh, if you have a system that.
There is no important information on it.
You can try installing the Linux
or other version of the Unix and
then use your own Unix, yeah.
Oh great.
One thing is that windows from Microsoft
has the virtual machine called.
I forgot the name of the virtual machine.
Basically there is an app you install that
app, I mean all other applications such as
which I mean virtual machine applications.
Basically they tried to simulate
a new machine within a machine.
So then in those virtual machine you can
install a new operating system but again.
The thing is that. It reduces the
efficiency of your current system.
I mean, uh, I mean,
the virtual machine allows you to run
multiple operating systems in the same time.
But The thing is that they share the same
resources such as CPU and memory and etc.
But that's a good experience if you want to
go deep inside different operating system,
installing virtual machine and installing
a fresh copy of operating system,
it's a good way to do that.
Yeah, but I cannot suggest this for
all these students because it needs
a little bit experience and such.
Yeah.
Any other questions?
So it seems there is no question we
have tennis student in the class,
Brandon Farhan, Nelly, Josh, Karine Mia.
Moha and Robert A. If there is any
question I available otherwise.
You can leave the class and then I can
close the virtual door of the class.
Thank you.
And have a great day.
So I have another yeah.
Uh, Brendan, Farrah,
and Josh. Can you hear me?
So I'm going to remove you from the
class if you don't mind. And, uh.
OK, thank you. So from this
session and also fine.
Also, Brandon.
Dan. Stop.